---
title: My Phone Addiction
path: /my-phone-addiction
date: 07-03-2021
description: Talking about my phone addiction and current management practices
---
At the ago of 13 years old, my dad got me an iPod Touch. It was one of the first
devices that had the screen take up most of the real estate. I already had
somewhat of an addictive personality noted by the amount time I spent playing
Nintendo games on my Gameboy throughout my childhood, but the iPod Touch was
gripping for different reasons. It gave me way more freedom than I could have
ever imagined at the time. I could play music, browse the internet, watch
YouTube videos, and play video games all on a single device. At this moment,
this may seem trivial and almost boring, but this was the first device that
offered such capabilities in the palm of your hand. And it felt like such a
positive thing too. There was more access to learn new things and more ways to
connect with people. But over time, society, especially including myself, became
consumed with what this new technology had to offer.

Today, I think I manage my device usage better than most people. Of course there
is personal bias involved in this evaluation, but let's assume I'm correct.
"Most people" is not a gold standard to aim for, and if my management is somehow
empirically better than the average, I can't imagine that I'm more than one
standard deviation ahead of the curve. My poor habits still negatively affect my
life and prevent me from reaching the goals I set for myself. I feel like my
sense of focus is out of control and I'm always looking for that next dopamine
hit. At the age of 26, I can do better. I'm not a child anymore, so I should
stop acting like I have all the time in the world to be mindlessly wandering
through my phone. 

I'm not doing all _that_ bad. I've been off of social media like Facebook,
Snapchat, and Instagram for at least two years. The only account I have is
LinkedIn, which feels like a necessary evil. In public, while waiting in line or
something, I don't really have an urge to pull out my phone to hinder any sense
of boredom. Sometimes when I'm riding the metro into DC to visit my girlfriend,
I'll just sit there silently in my thoughts or look at the passing by scenery. I
honestly find pulling out my phone and browsing through its contents to be
exhausting and mostly find myself doing so when I have extremely high amounts of
energy or extremely low amounts of energy. I can't imagine that my daily phone
usage takes up more than an hour total, and definitely no more than two hours.

However, I ain't all that and a bag of chips. The _biggest_ detriment from my
phone usage is my break in focus while doing work. It's hard during the work day
because I have to have access to Slack to receive notifications and for
business/policy reasons, I can't install Slack on my work computer. So I resort
to accessing it from my phone, and thus have to have it nearby. I think being
readily available at any given moment is a pretty harmful attitude for a culture
to have, but I get to work from home, so I'm not complaining at all. There are
labor workers that have to get out of bed at odd hours and risk their safety on
a daily basis, so the last thing I'm going to do is pout about getting paid to
be on call from the comfort and convenience of my home. But where my phone usage
really matter is when I'm working on my personal projects. After hours, I like
to explore new frameworks, programming languages and concepts, etc. But at the
end of the work day, my focus is already spent and it's very easy for me to veer
off into a YouTube rabbit hole. My most visited sites are YouTube and Hacker
News, most of which, I indulge in mindlessly. I honestly could learn a lot if I
used these sites correctly, but I'm usually seeking some sort of dopamine
barrage. I hardly finish reading any articles or watching the entirety of any
video, so this bad habit of mine has definitely chipped away my attention span
over time.

One of the techniques I've learned to use is to actually let myself tire myself
to the point of dread with these addictive sites. For example, I'll give myself
an entire two hours for just browsing YouTube until I absolutely go bored out of
my mind. It works surpisingly well for me and I find myself staying away from it
for a few days. It's not really sustainable because I'll eventually relapse, but
it definitely serves as a good habit reset. To strike a balance, I decided to
let myself not completely avoid these activities but have very specific times at
which I do them. For example, I have a reminder to check Hacker News at 9PM
every day, but I'm not allowing myself to access the site at any other time. The
most addictive quality about Hacker News for me is looking for new posts, most
of which I don't even end up reading. I just like seeing something new. Same
goes for email. I check my inboxes all the time, knowing full well I shouldn't
be expecting anything interesting. For email, I'm only allowing myself to access
it once at noon. If anything was super urgent, I would get a phone call or
something. When it comes to email, the sense of urgency never falls shorter than
a few days.

Writing all this down has definitely helped me process this bad habit of mine.
My phone addiction isn't even close to gone (and I'm not sure it will ever be),
but a little mental check up here and there should help me manage my usage and
give back more time for me to spend on the things that actually matter to me.
