---
title: "Projecting WASM: Part 1"
path: /002-projecting-wasm-pt1
date: 07-08-2021
description: Possibly getting myself into future trouble
---
So I've been thinking about this for a few days and I think I want to create a
[Game of Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life) simulation
on the home page. I've always been fascinated by this little toy simulation and
love the idea of being greeted by it every time I visit the site. And it has to
be written in Rust and compiled to WASM. Don't ask me why. That's just the way I
want it.

Now, this is somewhat of a tall order for me. I really like the way I have this
site set up at the moment and am hesitant about adding more complexity to the
backend. I originally wanted this site to serve as an easy way for me to write
and publish my thoughts, while at the same time maintaining a high degree of
control. I previously had a WordPress site, but quickly gave up on it because
the stack wasn't as lean as I wanted it and I felt pretty trapped from a
development standpoint. So I decided to develop this site in Gatsby. The big
selling point for me was that I could easily write posts in Markdown using my
favorite text editor, NeoVim. If I don't enjoy the tools I'm using, I'm probably
not going to want to write/develop as frequently, if at all. That's why I'm very
particular about my tooling. It's purely for a sense of enjoyment. And what was
even nicer with Gatsby is that since it is all just NPM project, I can host it
on GitHub, and set up some CI/CD pipeline to build and deploy my site on AWS. So
in the end of the day, all I have to do is just enjoy writing my posts in
NeoVim, push them to my repo, and then have my site built for me without leaving
the command line. I can't describe how awesome this set up feels. 

Which is all to say, everything is perfect and I would hate to disturb the
peace. Adding Rust to my stack would further complicate the build process. This
site is built by AWS CodeBuild and I'm using a default container environment to
build it. At the moment, the provided container environments don't support the
Rust runtime, so I'm left with two options: 1) create a Docker image that has
all the necessary prerequisites to build this site, or 2) add in the default
container a step to download and set up the Rust runtime for every build. The
former is the proper way to do it and the latter is the easier/hacky way.
Downloading and installing Rust for every build would significantly increase
build times, which I'm not into. AWS CodeBuild is pretty cheap already, but this
set up would make me want to take a shower afterwards. At the same time, I'm
hesitant to create a Docker image because I'm just not very skilled in doing so.
It's very time consuming which would prolong my Game of Life implementation. But
I guess there's really no reason for any sense of rush other than just pure
impatience.

I haven't even discussed the Rust-to-WASM compilation process, and somehow
integrating that with Gatsby. I think a big chunk of the effort will come with
learning how to use Webpack to package my Rust code into something that
JavaScript can call. Even then, I'm not sure how I'd get Gatsby to process the
WASM modules, but I'm pretty sure this is doable.

Really, what would be nice is to be able to write Rust code, have it compiled as
WASM modules, and then somehow called by React components. This doesn't sound
really that crazy, but it's just a matter of banging my head against a wall
enough times to get it to work.

But I'm getting ahead of myself. I'm just going to get a working proof of
concept for calling Rust-compiled WASM modules to be called from JavaScript. If
I can do that, I feel like that's half of the battle.
